
.. _midgardheroes:races:

Races, Southlands Heroes
------------------------

Aasimar
~~~~~~~

Aasimar Racial Variants
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Although not, strictly speaking, different races, aasimar
come from a variety of lineages that may alter their
natural abilities.

**Airy Spirit.** Your divine ancestor came from the Heaven of Buoyant
Skies. At 5th level, you can cast :ref:`srd:gaseous-form` once as a 3rd
level spell, and you regain the ability to do so when you finish a long
rest. This ability replaces the ability to cast the :ref:`srd:daylight`
spell.

**Alternate Resistance.** You were raised on a fiery plane or are the
descendant of a fire godling. You have resistance to fire damage. This
ability replaces your resistance to necrotic and radiant damage.

**Celestial Awareness.** You were trained to use all your senses to
avoid surprise attacks and assassinations. You gain blindsight to a
range of 10 feet. This ability replaces darkvision, and your ability to
cast the :ref:`srd:daylight` spell.

**Heaven’s Wrath.** You have been trained to focus the light and
righteousness of the Seven Heavens upon your enemies as a weapon. You
gain the ability to cast :ref:`srd:guiding-bolt` once as a 1st level
spell, and you regain the ability to do so when you finish a long rest.
This ability replaces your ability to cast the
:ref:`srd:lesser-restoration` and :ref:`srd:daylight` spells.

**Divine Splendor.** Your celestial ancestor was a leader of angelic hosts,
and you can summon their divine aura and captivate those who behold you.
At 3rd level, you gain the ability to cast :ref:`srd:enhance-ability`
(eagle’s splendor) once with a range of Personal as a 2nd level spell
without the need to maintain concentration, and you regain the ability
to do so when you finish a long rest. At 5th level, you gain the
benefits of both eagle’s splendor and owl’s wisdom when you use this
ability. A shining halo or nimbus forms around your head while the spell
is in effect, revealing your divine nature. The glow from the halo is
dim light with a ten-foot radius. This ability replaces your ability to
cast the :ref:`srd:lesser-restoration` and :ref:`srd:daylight` spells.

Gnoll
~~~~~

Gnoll Traits
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Your gnoll character has several special traits, the result of
a wild nature and growing in a harsh environment.

**Ability Score Increase.** Your Strength score increases by 2.

**Age.** Gnolls reach adulthood at age 12, and they live short and
brutal lives. The rare examples that die of old age experience only
around 70 summers.

**Alignment.** As a product of a culture that values laziness,
selfishness, and dominance, most gnolls are evil. On top of that, an
unpredictable existence, where every day could be the last, usually
leads to a chaotic view of the world. With that said, there are always
exceptions to every norm.

**Size.** Gnoll females are taller and more powerfully built than their
male counterparts. The former range from 7 to 8 feet and usually weight
more than 250 pounds, while the latter average 6 inches and 30 pounds
less. Your size is Medium.

**Speed.** Your base walking speed is 30 feet.

**Darkvision.** You can see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it
were bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim light. You cannot
discern color in darkness, only shades of gray.

**Scent.** You have advantage on Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on
smell.

**Bully.** Although gnolls are cowardly at heart, they like to disguise
their fears by abusing others. You have disadvantage on saving throws
against being frightened. On the other hand, whenever you make a
Charisma (Intimidation) check for dealing with obviously smaller or
weaker targets, you are considered proficient in the Intimidation skill
and add double your proficiency bonus to the check, instead of your
normal proficiency bonus.

**Live to Fight Another Day.** When you take the Disengage action, your
base walking speed is increased by 10 feet.

**Gnoll Weapon Training.** You have proficiency with the spear,
shortbow, longbow, light crossbow, and heavy crossbow.

**Languages.** You can speak, read, and write Southern and Gnollish.
Gnollish words sounds almost like growls for the uninitiated, and gnolls
tend to use scents and small gestures to convey subtle meanings. Two
gnolls speaking can almost seem like dogs barking at each other to a
casual observer.

**Subraces.** Although not, strictly speaking, different races, gnolls
from the civilized lands live in an environment so different than their
savage brethren that they are considered separate subraces. Choose one
of them.

Civilized Gnolls
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As a civilized gnoll, you are well-fed and enjoy the comforts that your
primitive cousins can only dream of. You were valued as a mercenary, a
temple guard, or simply a thug due to both your inherent toughness and
your desire to please those that are in charge.

**Ability Score Increase.** Your Constitution score increases by 1.

**Obsequious.** Whenever you make a Charisma (Persuasion) check for
dealing with obviously bigger or more powerful targets, you are
considered proficient in the Persuasion skill and add double your
proficiency bonus to the check, instead of your normal proficiency
bonus.

Savage Gnolls
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As a savage gnoll, you are in touch with your animal side and understand
the ways of nature. Your tribe has been raiding the desert or the plains
since generations ago, and you know the land in which you live like the
back of your hand.

**Ability Score Increase.** Your Wisdom score increases by 1.

**Scavenge.** Whenever you make a Wisdom (Survival) check for gathering
food or locating water, you are considered proficient in the Survival
skill and add double your proficiency bonus to the check, instead of
your normal proficiency bonus.

Lizardfolk
~~~~~~~~~~

Lizardfolk Traits
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As a lizardfolk, your heritage is ancient and your patience and
endurance far greater than most. Your people are hunters and raiders,
and entirely at home in marshes and water. You gain the following
traits.

**Ability Score Increase.** Your Strength score increases by 2, and your
Wisdom score increases by 1.

**Age.** Lizardfolk mature faster than humans, reaching adulthood at 16.
They also have shorter lifespans, with few lizardfolk living longer than
60 years.

**Alignment.** Typical lizardfolk are highly territorial, following the
beliefs and traditions of their tribes. They have no notion of civilized
morality, and they find the concepts of good and evil alien. As such,
lizardfolk tend toward neutrality. Lizardfolk who choose to leave their
villages, or who are banished, may do so for a variety of reasons,
including an alignment conflicting with typical lizardfolk society.

**Size.** Lizardfolk are slightly larger than the average human. Your size
is medium.

**Speed.** Your base walking speed is 30 feet. You have a swim speed of 30
feet.

**Natural Armor.** If you are not wearing armor, your base AC equals 12 +
your Dexterity modifier. You can use a shield and still gain this
benefit.

**Natural Attacks.** You have proficiency with your bite, which deals 1d6
piercing damage.

**Natural Predator.** You have proficiency with the Stealth skill.

**Hold Breath.** You can hold your breath for a number of minutes equal to
your Constitution score.

**Languages.** You speak, read, and write Draconic, plus one additional
language of your choice (typically Southern).

Lizardfolk Racial Variants
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Lizardfolk have developed a range of abilities beyond those that are
adapted for life in the swamp, and the race shows more variation than
some.

The lizardfolk choose up to two of the following variants, so long as
the two do not conflict by replacing the same ability. For instance,
both Gout of Blood and Poisonous Bite replace your bite ability, so you
cannot choose those two together. Likewise, Climber and Chromatophore
both replace swim speed, so those can also not be chosen together.

**Climber.** While climbing you suffer no movement penalties, you are
considered proficient in the Athletics skill, and add double your
proficiency bonus to checks made to climb, instead of your normal
proficiency bonus. This ability replaces your swim speed and hold breath
abilities.

**Chromatophore.** You can alter the color of your skin and can blend
into your environment. You gain advantage on Stealth checks made to hide
as long as you are not moving. If you are wearing no armor and carrying
no items, you may attempt to hide even if you have no cover or
obscurement. You can’t use this ability to hide while you are being
directly observed. This ability replaces your swim speed and hold breath
abilities.

**Digger.** You can burrow through soft sand, dirt, and mud at a rate of
10 feet per round. This ability replaces your swim speed ability.

**Glider.** You take no damage from falls. You gain a fly speed of 40
feet but cannot hover. At the end of any round you fly, you must have
descended at least one-quarter the distance you traveled or you fall.
This ability replaces your swim speed and hold breath abilities.

**Gout of Blood.** Some lizardfolk can force a jet of hot blood from
their eyes to disorient predators and prey. As an action, you can target
any creature within 15 feet with this ability and force the target to
make a Wisdom saving throw against a DC equal to 8 + your proficiency
modifier + your Dexterity modifier. On a failed save, the target is
frightened. The frightened creature can repeat this save at the end of
each of its turns, ending the condition on a success. Creatures wearing
full-face helmets, eye protection, etc. gain advantage on the save. You
may use this ability a number of times per day equal to your
Constitution modifier, and you regain all expended uses when you finish
a long rest. This ability replaces your bite attack.

**Regeneration.** Some lizardfolk heal at an impressive rate. Whenever
you spend at least one Hit Die to regain hit points during a short rest,
you regain an additional number of hit points equal to twice your
Constitution modifier. Severed fingers and toes regrow after 24 hours.
Severed hands and feet regrow after three days. Severed limbs regrow
after one week. If the severed body part is present and whole, you can
reattach it during a short rest as long as you spend at least one Hit
Die to regain hit points and perform no other actions, even light
duties. You gain one level of exhaustion when you begin regenerating a
limb. While a limb is regenerating, as well as for one day after the
regrowth is complete, you cannot have less than one level of exhaustion.
This ability replaces your natural armor and natural predator abilities.

**Poisoned Bite.** Lizardfolk are sometimes born with venomous fangs or
poisonous saliva delivered through their bite attack. You can make a
bite as an unarmed strike that deals piercing damage. On a successful
bite attack, the target must make a Constitution saving throw against a
DC equal to 8 + your proficiency modifier + your Constitution modifier.
On a failed save, the target gains the poisoned condition for 1 minute.
The target can repeat the save at the end of its turn, ending the effect
on a success. On a successful save or when the poisoned condition ends,
the target becomes immune to your poison for 24 hours. You may use this
ability a number of times per day equal to your Constitution modifier,
and you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest. This
ability replaces your bite, natural armor, swim speed, and hold breath
abilities.

**Purple-Blooded.** Some lizardfolk carry waste products through their
blood, excreting toxins that build up in their systems and granting
resistance to infections. You gain advantage on saving throws against
poisons and diseases. This ability replaces your natural armor.

**Pygmy.** Many remote tribes of lizardfolk are much smaller than their
common kin. Your Dexterity increases by +2 and your Wisdom increases by
+1. Your size becomes Small. This replaces your normal ability score
bonus and your Medium size.

New Lizardfolk Class Archetypes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Lizardfolk dwell far from the trappings of civilization, and learn to
live in a hostile world. Techniques that serve urban races fall short in
the harsh wilderness of the Southlands, and so lizardfolk rogues
capitalize on their reptilian nature to become more efficient killers.
Lizardfolk characters follow their class progression normally, but
replace several class features for the variants described below.

Ambush Predator (Assassin)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Assassins among the lizardfolk gain little benefit from impersonating
another creature, and so they developed an alternate method for dealing
death to their enemies. A lizardfolk’s low metabolism allows some to
wait in perfect ambush points for hours or days at a time. She strikes
without warning, ending a victim’s life with a rapid violent assault.

**Killer’s Craft.** At 3rd level, you gain proficiency with the
poisoner’s kit. Additionally, you can use the bonus action granted by
your Cunning Action to apply poison to a weapon. This ability replaces
Bonus Proficiencies.

**Patience.** At 9th level, you learn to wait in a single spot with
infinite patience. As long as you don’t move, you have advantage on any
saving throw against falling asleep or succumbing to exhaustion. While
you remain stationary you can undertake light activity (to remain on
watch only) for the entire duration of a long rest, and still gain its
benefits. If you move, or engage in any other sort of activity, you must
rest as normal for the remainder of the long rest to complete it. This
ability replaces Infiltration Expertise.

**Sniper.** At 13th level, you do not automatically reveal your location
when you attack while hidden. You must be at least 10 feet away from any
creature that could potentially hear or see you to use this ability.
Whenever you attack, you can make a new Dexterity (Stealth) check. Any
creature that might detect you gains advantage on its passive Wisdom
(Perception) score. If successful, you remain hidden. This ability
replaces Imposter.

Minotaur
~~~~~~~~

Minotaur Traits
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Your minotaur character has several special traits.

**Ability Score Increase.** Your Strength score increases by 2, and your
Constitution score increases by 1.

**Age.** Minotaurs mature at roughly the same rate as humans but mature
3 years earlier. Childhood ends around the age of 10 and adulthood is
celebrated at 15.

**Alignment.** Minotaurs possess a wide range of alignments, just as
humans do. Mixing a love for personal freedom and respect for history
and tradition, the majority of minotaurs fall into neutral alignments.

**Size.** Adult males can reach a height of 6 1⁄2 to 7 feet, with
females averaging 3 inches shorter. Your size is Medium.

**Speed.** Your base walking speed is 30 feet.

**Darkvision.** You can see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it
were bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim light. You cannot
discern color in darkness, only shades of gray.

**Natural Attacks.** You have proficiency with your horns, which deal
1d6 piercing damage.

**Charge.** If you move at least 10 feet toward a target and hit it with
a horn attack in the same turn, you deal an extra 1d6 piercing damage
and you can shove the target as a bonus action. You can apply this extra
damage once per turn. At 11th level, when you successfully shove a
creature with Charge, you can push it 10 feet instead of 5. You can use
this ability a number of times equal to your Constitution modifier, and
you regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.

**Labyrinth Sense.** You can retrace any path you have previously taken
without a check.

**Languages.** You can speak, read, and write Minotaur, as well as one
other language of your choice (typically the Trade Tongue or Southern
languages).

**Backgrounds.** Minotaurs in the Southlands are natural survivors and
commonly have the Guild Artisan, Outlander, Sailor, and Soldier
backgrounds.

Tosculi (Hiveless)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Tosculi (Hiveless) Traits
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Your tosculi character has several special traits.

**Ability Score Increase.** One of your physical ability scores
(Strength, Dexterity, Constitution) increases by 2, and one of your
mental ability scores (Intelligence, Wisdom, Charisma) increases by 2.
You also take a –2 penalty to any one ability score. You may apply this
penalty to the same ability score to which you gave a +2 bonus, granting
you an overall +2 bonus to any one ability score.

**Age.** Tosculi reach maturity at around 13 years, but have shorter
lifespans than most races with few living longer than 40 years.

**Alignment.** The tension between tosculi and other humanoids often
makes it difficult for the Hiveless to develop any true sense of
altruism toward others, and many are neutral in alignment, with good
tosculi being rare, and evil ones more common. Hiveless tosculi are
equally likely to be chaotic, lawful, or neutral.

**Size.** Hiveless tosculi are no more than 4 feet tall and typically
weigh less than a humanoid of the same size. Your size is Small.

**Speed.** Your base walking speed is 30 feet.

**Natural Armor.** Your Armor Class cannot be less than 11 + your
Dexterity modifier no matter what armor you are wearing.

**Natural Attacks.** You have proficiency with your claws, which deal
1d4 slashing damage.

**Gliding Wings.** You take no damage from falls. You gain a fly speed
of 40 feet but cannot hover. At the end of any round you fly, you must
have descended at least one-quarter the distance you traveled or you
fall.

**Stalker.** You have proficiency in the Perception skill and Stealth
skill.

**Languages.** You can speak, read, and write Tosculi and one other
language of your choice (typically Southern).

Alternate Racial Traits
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Binding Spittle.** As an Attack action, you may spit a ball of viscous
fluid at a target within 60 feet that is Medium or smaller. Make a
ranged attack against the target with proficiency. If successful, the
fluid hardens upon impact and the target becomes restrained. As an
action, the target can make a Strength check against a DC equal to 8 +
your proficiency bonus + your Constitution modifier to remove the
condition. Anyone adjacent to a creature restrained by binding spittle
may use their action to free the target in the same way. Dealing an
amount of bludgeoning damage equal to half your level plus your
Constitution modifier (AC 10) to the spittle also frees the target.
After you use binding spittle, you can’t use it again until you finish a
short or long rest. This trait replaces the Stalker trait.

**Bite.** Some hiveless tosculi develop the fierce mandibles associated
with the warriors that defend their hives. You can make a bite attack as
an unarmed strike that deals 1d6 slashing damage. On a successful hit
with a bite, you may attempt to grapple the target as a bonus action. At
11th level, your bite damage increases to 2d6. This trait replaces the
Stalker trait.

**Latent Hive Mind.** You know the :ref:`srd:message` cantrip. This
cantrip is a psionic ability that does not require components. The
cantrip also functions in a silence spell. At 3rd level you can cast the
:ref:`srd:detect-thoughts` spell once, without the need for components,
and you regain the ability to do so when you finish a long rest. This
trait replaces the Gliding Wings trait.

**Hardened Carapace.** Some hiveless tosculi develop additional defenses
at the cost of offensive ability. Your Armor Class cannot be less than
11 + your Constitution modifier + your Dexterity modifier no matter what
armor you are wearing. This trait replaces the Gliding Wings and Natural
Armor traits.

New Tosculi Class Archetypes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Tosculi are born with an unshakable sense of purpose and belonging
because of the golden song of the hive queen. Those few, sad wretches
who cannot hear the song must struggle to overcome the ever present void
within themselves. To that end, hiveless tosculi have access to the
following variant class paths for Druid and Ranger. Tosculi characters
follow their class progressions normally, but replace several class
features for the variants described below.

Variant Druid: Circle of the Hive (Circle of the Land)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Hiveless druids turn to their connection to nature to fill the void
within themselves. This variant Circle of the Land druid creates an echo
of the golden song by reaching out to the memory of the hive, and
shaping magic with that memory. The so-called Circle of the Hive druids
gain access to the Hive land for their Circle Spells class feature.

HIVE
""""

=========== =======================================================
Druid Level Circle Spells
=========== =======================================================
3rd         :ref:`srd:spider-climb`, :ref:`srd:web`
5th         :ref:`srd:conjure-animals`, :ref:`srd:fly`
7th         :ref:`srd:freedom-of-movement`, :ref:`srd:giant-insect`
9th         :ref:`srd:contagion`, :ref:`srd:insect-plague`
=========== =======================================================

Vermin’s Ward
"""""""""""""
At 10th level, you become immune to poison and disease. In addition, you
ignore movement restrictions caused by webbing and gain advantage on
saving throws against being restrained. This ability replaces Nature’s
Ward.

Variant Druid: Circle of the Swarm (Circle of the Moon)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Hiveless tosculi who join the Circle of the Moon have their own way of
coping with their renegade status. Their shape-shifting powers create a
false hive song within. This allows the Circle of the Swarm druid to
access creature shapes unavailable to druids of other races.

Insectoid Forms
"""""""""""""""

Your wild shape feature works as the Circle of the Moon’s Circle Forms
with the following changes.

Your choice of forms is limited. You may use Wild Shape to change into
any insectoid, arachnid, or similar beast (such as a crab), though you
must still have seen the creature to do so. In addition, you gain access
to the following list of non-standard forms (you must follow the same CR
and ability restrictions as outlined in Circle Forms): ankheg, carrion
crawler, death wasp (use wyvern stats), giant rhinoceros beetle (use
triceratops stats), and swarm of insects (all variants). Other insectoid
forms may be available at your DM’s discretion.

Monstrous Wild Shape
""""""""""""""""""""

At 10th level, you can expend two uses of Wild Shape at the same time to
transform into a bullette, chuul, phase spider, or umber hulk. This
ability replaces Elemental Wild Shape.

Variant Ranger: Hivemaster (Beast Master)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Unable to form a connection with others of its kind, the hivemaster
finds kinship with insects of the natural world, forming bonds with them
and gaining the ability to rouse them against their enemies.

Hivemaster rangers parallel the Beast Master archetype, though they have
a more specialized list of companions to choose from.

Insect Companion
""""""""""""""""

When you choose this archetype at 3rd level, you
gain a trained beast companion that accompanies you on your adventures
and fights alongside you. You must select your companion from the
following list: blood hornet or wasp (use flying snake stats), giant
crab, giant centipede, giant wolf spider, or swarm of insects. At the
DM’s discretion other insectoid beasts may be suitable companions, but
none should have a challenge rating higher than 1/4 (the swarm of
insects is an exception to this restriction).

You form a limited hive-mind that allows you to communicate
telepathically with your insect companion, as long as it is within 100
feet. You can issue commands to your companion verbally, or
telepathically.

In all other ways this ability is identical to the Beast Master’s
standard Beast Companion ability.

Werelion
~~~~~~~~

Werelion Traits
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Natural werelions are human in appearance but are natural shapechangers,
able to assume a hybrid leonine form and the form of a lion. Your
character possesses the following traits.

**Ability Score Increase.** Your Wisdom score increases by 2, and your
Strength score increases by 1.

**Age.** Although human in both appearance and origin, werelions’
lycanthropic physiology allows them to live several decades longer than
humans.

**Alignment.** Naturally rebellious, werelions often leave familial
prides when they come of age. Although passionate about family,
werelions are fiercely independent. The average werelion is neutral in
alignment, balancing personal freedom with dedication to their pride.

**Size.** In humanoid form, natural werelions appear to be strong,
muscular humans with long, thick hair, and fluid, graceful movements.
Your size is Medium in your humanoid and hybrid forms, but may be Medium
or Large in your lion forms.

**Speed.** Your base walking speed is 30 feet.

**Darkvision.** You can see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it
were bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim light. You cannot
discern color in darkness, only shades of gray.

**Natural Shapechanger.** Natural werelions possess the magical ability
to assume two alternate forms—the hybrid leonine and the lion. As an
action, you can change into either your hybrid leonine form or your lion
form. You can remain in this form for 1 hour, reverting to your humanoid
form when the time expires, you fall unconscious, you drop to 0 hit
points, or you die.

You can revert to your humanoid form early as a bonus action. Once you
use this ability, you can’t use it again until you finish a short rest.

**Hybrid Form.** In your hybrid leonine form you grow sharp teeth and
claws, and take on a more intimidating feline appearance. In this hybrid
form you may use weapons, wear armor, and carry equipment normally. Your
base walking speed increases to 40 feet. You have proficiency with your
claws and bite. Your claws deal 1d4 slashing damage, and are considered
light weapons. Your bite deals 1d4 piercing damage.

In addition, you gain advantage on Charisma (Intimidate) checks, and
Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on smell. You gain disadvantage on
Intelligence checks and all other Charisma checks.

**Lion Form.** You may assume the form of a young lion (use the stat
block for the panther) as if using the druid’s Wild Shape class feature.
Unlike that feature, you retain your own hit points between forms. At
8th level you instead assume the form of a full-grown lion when you use
this ability.

**Languages.** You can speak, read, and write Southern and Sylvan.
